Mm.....There's that song again.... Well now — it's been a little while, hasn't it?....The pond froze, and thawed, and froze again....And somewhere in all that... a whole new batch of stories went and grew.
If you've sat with us before... welcome back, little one....And if you're brand new to Shiloh Creek... pull up a warm spot. You're right on time.....I'm Old Timber. The elephant elder. And this is where every story starts — pondside, with me.
Now....Today, my friends, I want to ask you something.....What does it mean... to be the smartest?....And — here's the real question — does the smartest one... always turn out to be right?.....Mm. You hold onto that. The answer is in the story.
I'll tell you a small thing first, little ones.....The God who made the whole wide creek... has a funny way of turning things right-side up.....The loud ones... He sets down gentle.....And the quiet ones... the ones nobody's watching... sometimes He lifts up first.....It's a strange and lovely arithmetic. And once — long ago — somebody said it out loud.....But that part comes later. First — the contest.
It was a bright, breezy morning by the big old oak....And from his perch on the lecture branch swooped Professor Hoot — the most certain owl in all of Shiloh Creek....He cleared his throat — ahem — tapped his little stick upon the branch... and announced,
Friends! Creatures of the creek! Gather, gather. I, Professor Hoot, have devised a contest. A noble contest. A contest to settle, once and for all, the single most important question in the natural world... which of us is the SMARTEST animal in Shiloh Creek.
I shall judge it. I shall also, I confess, most likely win it. But fairness demands the contest be HELD, so. Three rounds. Three chances for the rest of you to be... educated. The winner receives the Golden Acorn, which I have personally hidden, and which is, I assure you, exceedingly difficult to retrieve.
Ooh! Ooh! A contest! Friends — I got this! I am VERY smart. I know — I know lots of things! I know which berries are the sweet ones! That's smart! Right?
...Bongo. ...Knowing the sweet berries... is a different kind of smart.
Okay — okay. A contest. I can WIN a contest. I have built a Smartness-Optimization-Framework —
...A list of guesses... written down very fast.
...Essentially, yes. But a VERY good list.
BEHOLD! A CONTEST OF MINDS! And I — Gah-Ring-Goh, parrot of the wood, keeper of the longest words and the grandest sentences — shall surely triumph! For I know words! Polysyllabic words! Words of MAGNITUDE!
...Garingo. ...What's that mean? ...It means big words. That's all. Just... big words.
Big words! Yes! Garingo knows lots of... syllabubs! Lots and lots of syllabubs!
...wait. No — Splash, a syllabub's a pudding. The real word is SYLLABLE. A syllable is just one little beat in a word — like po-ly-syl-la-ble, that's five beats. ...Mm. ...Okay, but now I want pudding. Is a syllabub a snack?
Um.....Hello, everyone.....I don't think... I'll enter the contest.....I'll just... watch. And help, if anybody needs it.
As you wish, dear Fern. Watching is, after all, the role best suited to those who do not expect to win. Now! ROUND ONE. A riddle. The Riddle of the Reeds. Listen closely, for I shall say it but once... and then, naturally, explain it at considerable length.
The riddle! I speak with no mouth, yet the whole creek hears me. I have no legs, yet I run to the sea. I am thin, I am green, I bend but do not break. What am I?
Ooh! Ooh! Is it — a worm? A very long worm? That runs? ...Wait. Worms don't run. ...Okay, maybe I don't got this one.
It is a METAPHOR! A grand and sweeping metaphor for the JOURNEY OF LIFE! No — wait — it is the WIND, the eternal wind, the breath of the — no. Hm. It is... a river? It bends but does not break? ...I shall commit to RIVER. Loudly. RIVER!
Incorrect. Loudly incorrect. The answer — and I am DELIGHTED to supply it — is the REED. The humble reed. Which brings me, naturally, to the matter of how reeds were once used to make the very first flutes, a topic I could discourse upon until the moon —
...Professor. The moon is not in this contest.
...Pardon. As I was saying. Round one to Professor Hoot. ROUND TWO! The Tower. Build me the tallest tower of pebbles that will stand on its own. Engineering, my friends. The very SOUL of intelligence.
Okay. Pebble-stacking. I have THIS. Load-bearing base, narrowing apex, center of gravity exactly — wait wait — I just had SEVEN ideas! I will use a counterweight! And a buttress! And a tiny pebble-crane —
...Zippy. A buttress is just a leaning-brace. ...And a pebble does not need a crane.
I got — I mean — okay let me just stack them careful. One. Two. Three. Four — oh. Oh no.
Um....Bongo?....Your tower fell because the bottom pebble was round.....A flat one... underneath... would hold the rest.....Here. This one.
...Whoa. Fern. It STANDS. Look — one, two, three, four, FIVE! Thank you, Fern!
...A serviceable tower. Built, I note, with assistance. Round two I shall award to... Bongo, provisionally.
...Wait. What does that mean? Is that a good thing?
...It means for now, Bongo. For now. Pending further proof. Which brings us to... ROUND THREE. The final round. The Golden Acorn itself — wedged deep in the knot of the hollow log. Retrieve it, and prove your intelligence beyond all doubt. I, of course, hid it. So I shall demonstrate.
Now... this is the part where things got interesting, little ones.....The Golden Acorn sat deep in the knot of the old hollow log....And Professor Hoot, certain as sunrise, stepped up to fetch it himself.
Observe, my friends, the application of LEVERAGE. I shall insert a twig. I shall apply the principle of the fulcrum — that is, a balance-point — and the acorn shall simply... pop... loose. ...Any moment now. ...The fulcrum is... the fulcrum is sound. ...The acorn, however, is not cooperating.
Okay — let me — I'll build a pulley! A pebble counterweight on a vine, threaded through the knot, multiplying the force by — hmm. ...The vine won't fit the gap. The gap is too narrow for the vine. ...Huh.
Permit ME. I shall RECITE to it! Acorn! Hear my voice! Loosen thyself, O stubborn seed, and ROLL forth into glory! ...It is not rolling forth. The acorn is unmoved by oratory. ...Most disappointing.
...What's that mean? ...Oh. It just means fancy talking. ...Talking does not move acorns.
Um.....Professor Hoot?.....I wasn't going to say anything.....But — there's a little crack. At the back of the log. Where the rain got in.....The wood's gone soft there.....If you push the acorn from the front... it'll slide out the soft side. Gently. You don't have to pull it at all.
...Push from the front. ...The soft side. ...
It WORKED! The acorn — it just slid right out! Fern did it! Fern got the Golden Acorn!
...I built this contest. To prove I was the smartest. And I knew the most facts. I truly did. The riddle, the lever, the fulcrum — I knew them all.....And not one of them... fetched the acorn.
Fern fetched it. Quiet Fern. The one I said should watch... because she did not expect to win.....And she did not WANT to win. That's the thing I keep turning over. She wasn't trying to beat me. She was just... trying to help.
I have spent every Tuesday of my life... collecting facts. To be the cleverest owl on the branch. To win the room.....But Fern took one small fact — a soft crack in an old log — and she used it to lift somebody else up.....And I sat here, with all my facts... and lifted up only myself.
Mm.....Professor Hoot.....May I ask you something?
...Of course, Old Timber. Ask.
When you know a thing... a good true fact... what is it FOR?.....Is it a crown... to set upon your own head?.....Or is it a candle... to light the room... so everybody can see?.....Don't tell me. Ask Fern. She seems to know.
Um.....I think.....a fact is a candle.....When I saw the soft crack... I wasn't thinking about being smart.....I was just thinking — there's Bongo, and there's the acorn, and how do I help.....The knowing only mattered... because I gave it away.....And — that's the funny thing, Professor Hoot.....When I stopped trying to be first... I think I was just... allowed to be useful.
...A candle. Not a crown.....Fern — thank you. I built a whole contest to be told I was the smartest. And the smartest thing said all morning... was yours.....And you weren't even trying to win it.
Mm.....Did you all hear that?....The one who came last... the one who didn't even enter... turned out to be first.....That's not an accident, little ones.....That's the God who made the creek... lifting up the lowly. Setting the gentle ones at the front.....He's been doing it... since the very beginning.
Mm.....So. Back by the pond that afternoon, I asked the friends — what was the moment that turned it all around?.....And Fern, soft as ever, said it was when she stopped trying to be first.....And Professor Hoot — and this surprised everybody — said the wisest thing in the wood that day had come from the quietest mouth.....Mm. That's the kind of turning-around the God who made the creek has always loved.
Now....here's that line I told you about. The one from a long, long time ago.....One time, in the Bible, Jesus told his friends a story — about workers in a field. Some came at sunrise, and some came at the very last hour.....And when the story was done, Jesus said this....'So the last shall be first, and the first last.'.....The last... shall be first.....Mm. That's our story. That's Fern. That's the whole of it.
Here's a small thing to carry this week, little ones.....When you know something good — how to tie the knot, where the soft crack is, which berries are sweet — don't hold it up like a crown.....Find somebody who needs it... and hand it over, quiet, like Fern did.....A fact is a candle. Candles are for sharing the light.
Mm....And now, friends... it's time for Mudpuppy Minutes — the part of the show where Splish, Splash, and Splosh tell us a thing... they have learned.
Today on Mudpuppy Minutes... we will explain... why the smallest puddle... is always the bravest puddle.
It's because the small puddle has nothing to lose! It is SO small! It is basically a brave little dot of water!
AND ALSO — ! Small things ARE brave! Like — a tiny seed grows a whole tree! And a tiny acorn was the whole contest! And a quiet little Fern won without even trying! So small means... important!
...Oh no, no. No, no. That can't be right. That's too easy. Small doesn't mean important. Small means... the puddle is practicing to be a LAKE.
...Wait. Wait. Is it actually just... that small things matter just as much as big things? Is that it?
...Nah.
Mudpuppies, mudpuppies — we have solved it! The bravest puddle... is the smallest puddle... because it is secretly a lake in training. ...Like a bell. On a cold rock.
Mm....And friends — one more small thing.....Somebody who learned something this morning... has asked to say a word.....A NEW word, he tells me. He's been waiting all afternoon.
Friends. Creatures of the creek. I have given the matter a great deal of thought — roughly an afternoon's worth — and I have reached a DECISION. Henceforth! Professor Hoot shall no longer collect facts to prove he is the smartest. Henceforth, Professor Hoot shall share his Totally True Facts... not to BEST you... but to ENLIGHTEN you.
And so — the very FIRST Totally True Fact! Tied, fittingly, to a small creature who goes from last to first. The hermit crab! When a hermit crab outgrows its shell, it must go and find a bigger one.
And here is the wonder — the crabs line up by size, smallest to largest. The biggest crab takes the new big shell... which leaves ITS old shell for the next crab... which leaves ITS shell for the next... all the way down. Everybody moves up at once.
...Whoa. Everybody at once?
Everybody at once! And the very smallest crab — the LAST in line — gets the very first crab's shell. The last... gets a first shell of its own. Real biology, my friends! A whole shell-chain, settled in a single afternoon!
Which brings me, naturally, to the matter of the coconut crab, a cousin so large it can crack a coconut with one claw — ...Pardon. As I was saying. The shell-chain. The last shall — well. The last gets a fine first shell. ...That is the fact. You're welcome.
Mm.....A fine first fact, Professor.....Tied to the shells... and not to the lesson. ...That's exactly right. The lesson... that one's mine to keep.
Mm.....And that, my friends, is the day the smartest animal in Shiloh Creek... turned out to be the one who wasn't trying to be.....Until the next breeze brings us together, my friends.....Walk gently out there, little ones. And when you know something good — share the light.